# The optimal post-eclosion interval while estimating the post-mortem interval based on an empty puparium

#### Jędrzej Wydra, Szymon Matuszewski

## Abstract
The puparium is the hardened exoskeleton of the last larval instar of a fly, inside which a prepupa, a pupa and a pharate adult fly successively develop. Empty puparia are frequently collected at death scenes, especially in cases with a long post mortem interval (PMI). Although we are not able to estimate the interval between the eclosion of an adult fly and the collection of an empty puparium (i.e. the post-eclosion interval (PEI)), empty puparia may still provide valuable evidence about the minimum PMI. However, because of the unknown PEI, it is impossible to determine the time when the fly emerged, and thus when the retrospective calculation of the minimum PMI should start. In this study, the estimation of PMI (or minimum PMI) for empty puparia of Protophormia terraenovae Rob.-Desv. (Calliphoridae) and Stearibia nigriceps Meig. (Piophilidae) was simulated, to gain insight into the changes in estimates, when different PEIs and different temperature conditions were assumed. The simulations showed that the PEI (in a range of 0–90 days) had no effect on the PMI (or minimum PMI) when the puparium was collected in winter or early spring (December–April). In late spring, summer, or autumn (May–November) the PMI (or minimum PMI) increased with the PEI. The increase in PMI was large in the summer months, and surprisingly small in the autumn months, frequently smaller than the PEI used in the estimation. The shortest PMI was always obtained with a PEI of 0, indicating that the true minimum PMI is always estimated using a PEI of 0. When the puparium was collected during spring, simulations indicated that oviposition had occurred in the previous year, while in summer the previous-year oviposition has been indicated by the simulations only when longer PEIs had been assumed. These findings should guide estimation of the PMI (or minimum PMI) based on an empty puparium.

## Full-text hyperlink
You can access the full paper here: [The optimal post-eclosion interval while estimating the post-mortem interval based on an empty puparium](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12024-020-00328-y)

## History
This project was my second major adventure into the world of forensic science and data science, and to my delight, it turned out to be an enormous success—it’s the most cited paper I’ve ever published! But, as with any good sequel, it still has its share of growing pains. The R scripts, much like in my first project, are a bit of a wild ride—let’s just say they didn’t win any awards for neatness. In fact, they’re a prime example of what happens when an enthusiastic data scientist is more focused on results than organization. Looking back, I realize that learning to tidy up my scripts took me much longer than I’d like to admit. But hey, out of chaos comes greatness, right?
